Edit down the security section (#364)
quicwg/qlog: draft-ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema.md

# Security and privacy considerations {#privacy}

Protocols such as TLS {{?RFC8446}} and QUIC {{?RFC9000}} offer secure protection
for the wire image {{?RFC8546}}. Logging can reveal aspects of the wire image
that would ordinarily be protected, creating tension between observability,
security and privacy, especially if data can be correlated across data sources.

Depending on the observability use case any data could be logged or captured. As
per {{?RFC6973}}, operators must be aware that such data could be compromised,

> risking the privacy of all participants. Entities that expecti internet protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
risking the privacy of all participants. Entities that expect protocol
```

features to ensure data privacy might unknowingly be subject to broader privacy
risks, undermining their ability to assess or respond effectively.

## Data at risk

qlog operators and implementers need to consider security and privacy risks when

> handling qlog data, including logging, storage, usage and more. Data can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handling qlog data, including logging, storage, usage, and more. Data can be
```

> handling qlog data, including logging, storage, usage and more. Data can be
> categorized as non-sensitive, potentially-sensitive, or sensitive. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handling qlog data, including logging, storage, usage, and more.  The
```
Optionally.  The classification thing doesn't add to the narrative.

Author: @rmarx any strong feelings here since it is your text?

Reviewer 2: It's fine for me to remove this, but then there's another sentence just a little bit further that also mentions "potentially-sensitive and sensitive" that probably should be cut as well.

considerations presented in this section may pose varying risks depending on the
the data itself or its handling. Generally, the largest risk factors arise from
data considered as potenially-sensitive or sensitive.

> The following is a non-exhaustive list of example data types could contain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is a non-exhaustive list of example data types that could contain
```

> sensitive information that might allow identification or correlatation of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sensitive information that might allow identification or correlation of
```

individual connections, endpoints, users or sessions across qlog or other data
sources (e.g., captures of encrypted packets):

* IP addresses and transport protocol port numbers.

* Session, Connection, or User identifiers e.g., QUIC Connection IDs {{Section
  9.5 of !RFC9000}}).

* System-level information e.g., CPU, process, or thread identifiers.

> * Stored State e.g, QUIC address validation and retry tokens, TLS session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Stored State e.g., QUIC address validation and retry tokens, TLS session
```

  tickets, and HTTP cookies.

> * TLS decryption keys, passwords, HTTP-level API access or authorization tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* TLS decryption keys, passwords, and HTTP-level API access or authorization tokens.
```

* High-resolution event timestamps or inter-event timings, event counts, packet
  sizes, and frame sizes.

> * Full, or partial encrypted, raw packet and frame payloads.

Author: ```suggestion
* Full or partial raw packet and frame payloads that are encrypted.
```

@rmarx is something like this the intent?

Reviewer 2: In combination with the consistency changes below for plaintext, this indeed seems ok

> * Full, or partial encrypted, raw packet and frame payloads.

Reviewer: I was going to suggest something, but I don't know how to parse this.

> * Full, or partial, plaintext raw packet and frame payloads e.g., HTTP Field
>   values, HTTP response data, TLS SNI field values.

Author: consistency with above (if we go that way)

```suggestion
* Full or partial raw packet and frame payloads that are plaintext e.g., HTTP Field
  values, HTTP response data, or TLS SNI field values.
```

## Operational implications and recommendations

> Operational considerations should focus on capture and access. Logging of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operational considerations should focus on authorizing capture and access to logs. Logging of
```

> Internet protocols using qlog is equivalent the ability to store or read plaintext

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internet protocols using qlog can be equivalent the ability to store or read plaintext
```

> Internet protocols using qlog can be equivalent the ability to store or read plaintext

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internet protocols using qlog can be equivalent to the ability to store or read plaintext
```

> communications, so all security considerations of plaintext apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communications. Without a more detailed analysis, all of the security considerations of plaintext access apply.
```

It is recommended that qlog capture is subject to access control and auditing,
extending to granularity over the level of information that is allowed to be

> captured (e.g., capture of more-sensitive data requires higher privileges).

Reviewer 2: `extending to granularity over the level of information that is allowed to be
captured` 

this is a very weird sentence to me that I'm having issues parsing the meaning of... could do with a re-formulation (the e.g., helps, but still :))

It is recommended that access to stored qlogs is subject to access control and
auditing.

End users might not understand the implications of qlog to security or privacy,

> and their environments limit access control techniques. Implementations should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and their environments might limit access control techniques. Implementations should
```

> make enabling qlog conspicous (e.g., requiring clear and explicit actions to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make enabling qlog conspicuous (e.g., requiring clear and explicit actions to
```

## Data minimization or anonymization

Applying data minimization or anonymization techniques to qlog might help
address some security and privacy risks. However, removing or anonymizing data
without sufficient care might not enhance privacy or security and
could diminish the utility of qlog data.

Operators and implementers should balance the value of logged data with the
potential risks of (involuntary) disclosure, which can depend on use cases
(e.g., research datasets might have different requirements to live operational
troubleshooting).

> The most extreme for of minimization or anonymization is deleting a field,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most extreme form of minimization or anonymization is deleting a field,
```

equivalent to not logging it. qlog implementations should offer fine-grained
control for this on a per-use-case or per-connection basis.

Data can undergo anonymization, pseudonymization, permutation, truncation,
re-encryption, or aggregation; see {{Appendix B of !DNS-PRIVACY=RFC8932}} for
techniques, especially regarding IP addresses. However, operators should be
cautious because many anonymization methods have been shown to be insufficient to safeguard
user privacy or identity, particularly with large or easily correlated data sets.

Operators should consider end user rights and preferences. Active user participation (as
indicated by {{!RFC6973}}) on a per-qlog basis is challenging but aligning qlog
capture, storage, and removal with existing user preference and privacy controls
is crucial. Operators should consider agressive approaches to deletion or
aggregation.

The most sensitive data in qlog is typically contained in RawInfo type fields

> (see {{raw-info}}). Therefore, qlog users exercise caution and limit the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see {{raw-info}}). Therefore, qlog users should exercise caution and limit the
```

## Data minimization or anonymization

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Applying data minimization or anonymization techniques to qlog might help
address some security and privacy risks. However, removing or anonymizing data

> without sufficient care may not necessarily enhance privacy or security and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without sufficient care might not enhance privacy or security and
```

could diminish the utility of qlog data.

Operators and implementers should balance the value of logged data with the
potential risks of (involuntary) disclosure, which can depend on use cases
(e.g., research datasets might have different requirements to live operational
troubleshooting).

The most extreme for of minimization or anonymization is deleting a field,
equivalent to not logging it. qlog implementations should offer fine-grained
control for this on a per-use-case or per-connection basis.

Data can undergo anonymization, pseudonymization, permutation, truncation,
re-encryption, or aggregation; see {{Appendix B of !DNS-PRIVACY=RFC8932}} for
techniques, especially regarding IP addresses. However, operators should be

> cautious because many of these have been shown to be insufficient to safeguard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cautious because many anonymization methods have been shown to be insufficient to safeguard
```
